---
layout: page
title:  "Chapter 3 - Using Hiera"
date:   2013-12-19 12:13:48
categories: puppet
---

Hiera allows hierarchical configuration in Puppet, which is difficult
to achieve with native Puppet code. Another major advantage is the
separation of configuration data from the code, which makes everything
generally easier. This is probably why Hiera comes bundled with Puppet
Enterprise. To get a feel for what it can do, see the [Puppet Labs
Overview of Hiera][hiera-overview].

## <a name="A Basic Configuration"></a>A Basic Configuration

For testing purposes, we're going to create a very simple Hiera-based
Puppet Master configuration. At this point, we only have the three
Puppet hosts to play with (Puppet Master, Puppet Console and PuppetDB),
so we'll verify the configuration on these nodes first. To keep things
simple, we'll follow the Hiera configuration example from the
Overview, so this will be the order of events:

*  Make a hiera.yaml config file.
*  Arrange a hierarchy that fits your site and data.
*  Write data sources.
*  Use your Hiera data in Puppet.

To get to grips with Hiera, it's worth following the [Puppet Labs
complete example][hiera-complete-example], in which the ntp service is
configured. So we first need to install the ntp puppet module on the
Puppet Master...

{% highlight text %}
# puppet module install puppetlabs/ntp
Notice: Preparing to install into /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules ...
Notice: Downloading from https://forge.puppetlabs.com ...
Notice: Installing -- do not interrupt ...
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/modules
└── puppetlabs-ntp (v2.0.1)
{% endhighlight %}

### <a name="hiera.yaml and The Hierarchy"></a>hiera.yaml and The Hierarchy

Hiera's hierarchy configuration is in
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera.yaml.

Note: If we edit this file, then Puppet needs to be restarted before
it will pick up the changes (service pe-puppet restart).

The default Hiera configuration looks like this:

{% highlight yaml %}
---
:backends:
  - yaml
:hierarchy:
  - defaults
  - "%{clientcert}"
  - "%{environment}"
  - global
:yaml:
# datadir is empty here, so hiera uses its defaults:
# - /var/lib/hiera on *nix
# - %CommonAppData%\PuppetLabs\hiera\var on Windows
# When specifying a datadir, make sure the directory exists.
  :datadir:
{% endhighlight %}

Hiera looks for data in /var/lib/hiera by default. To keep
everything in one place, we'll change this to
/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera. We'll also change the hierarchy a bit,
so the new config file looks like this:

{% highlight yaml %}
---
:backends:
  - yaml
:hierarchy:
    - node/%{::fqdn}
    - "%{::environment}"
    - global
:yaml:
  :datadir: /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera
{% endhighlight %}

Note the double-colon forces these variables to be top-scope. We do
this to remove any ambiguity which may arise if a module were to
define a variable of the same name. Top-scope namespace is the empty
string, which is why nothing preceeds the double-colon.

This Hiera configuration provides a lot of flexibility. It allows:

* A global configuration standard for all nodes (useful for enforcing a standard build policy).
* The ability to override the global configuration for a particular environment
* The ability to override global and environment configuration for a particular node.

For example, if we create a new node called 'webserver1' in
environment 'uat', Hiera will search for Puppet module parameters in
the following files, in this order:

{% highlight text %}
1. /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera/node/webserver1.yaml    
2. /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera/uat.yaml                
3. /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera/global.yaml             
{% endhighlight %}

So that's:

1. Specific config for this particular node
2. Config for all nodes in UAT
3. Common config for all nodes

One really nifty feature is that Puppet will search for module
parameters automatically. It doesn't have to be explicitly configured
to search Hiera data (unless the module in question uses 'defined types' - see the
[Using Hiera with Defined Types](#Using Hiera with Defined Types) section later in this page).

#### Example: Data Sources and the ntp Service

Data sources are written in YAML, which is a really simple
human-readable data format. For a quick glance at how data structures
are represented in YAML, [read this][yaml-for-ruby].

For example, when configuring the ntp service, we can define any
global options in global.yaml:

{% highlight yaml %}
ntp::package_ensure: latest
ntp::service_enable: true
ntp::service_ensure: running
ntp::servers:
  - ntp0.puppetlunch.com iburst
  - ntp1.puppetlunch.com iburst
  - ntp2.puppetlunch.com iburst
  - ntp3.puppetlunch.com iburst
ntp::driftfile: /var/lib/ntp/drift
{% endhighlight %}

Any of these options may be overriden further up the hierarchy. So for
example, if we have an environment called "uat" in which we didn't
want to run the ntp service, we could put this in uat.yaml:

{% highlight yaml %}
ntp::service_ensure: stopped
{% endhighlight %}

To test this, we can run the hiera command line tool, which allows you
to test your Hiera configuration without repeated puppet agent runs:

{% highlight text %}
# hiera ntp::service_ensure ::environment=uat
stopped
# hiera ntp::service_ensure ::environment=dev
running
{% endhighlight %}

However, if we wanted to run the ntp service on a particular node in
uat called "uat-web1.puppetlunch.com" we can do this no problem in node/uat-
web1.puppetlunch.com.yaml:

{% highlight yaml %}
ntp::service_ensure: running
{% endhighlight %}

And test:

{% highlight text %}
# hiera ntp::service_ensure ::environment=uat
stopped
# hiera ntp::service_ensure ::environment=uat ::fqdn=uat-web1.puppetlunch.com
running
{% endhighlight %}

### <a name="Using Hiera Data in Puppet"></a>Using Hiera Data in Puppet

We briefly mentioned that Puppet automatically searches Hiera data for
module parameters. So when we 'include' the ntp class, Puppet will query
hiera for its parameters. Let's do that...

File: /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/manifests/site.pp
 
{% highlight text %}
node default {
  #
  # First test: ntp. This includes the puppetlabs ntp module, which should
  # pick up its parameters from Hiera automatically.
  #
  include ntp
}
{% endhighlight %}

We can also use Hiera to load the ntp class as well, using the
[hiera_include][hiera-include] function. Like this:

File: /etc/puppetlabs/puppet/manifests/site.pp
 
{% highlight text %}
hiera_include('classes')
{% endhighlight %}

Then we define the 'classes' array in global.yaml:

{% highlight yaml %}
#
# Specify which classes to enable
#
classes:
  - ntp
{% endhighlight %}

This provides the magical ability to enable and disable classes from
the global configuration file, rather than editing the Puppet
site.pp manifest directly.

Note: This also allows us to leave the classes array undefined in
global.yaml and enable the appropriate classes per environment, or
even per node. Hopefully it's becoming clear how flexible this Hiera
tool can be...

In any case, we're now including the ntp module, and providing parameter
data via Hiera, all with very little effort!

### <a name="Using Hiera with Defined Types"></a>Using Hiera with Defined Types

Sometimes the options required by a particular module are a bit more
complex; usually because the module has defined a particular resource
type. In these cases, Puppet's automatic parameter lookup function
will fail as it will only search for class parameters in Hiera, but we
can help it to find what it's looking for using the built-in functions
[hiera][fn-hiera] and [create_resources][fn-create_resources].

What does this mean? Well, here's an example of the data structure
required by the puppetlabs/apache module, which defines its own
resource type 'apache::vhost':

This is how we might use the defined type in a Puppet manifest:

{% highlight text %}
apache::vhost { 'foo.example.com':
      port          => '80',
      docroot       => '/var/www/foo.example.com',
      docroot_owner => 'foo',
      docroot_group => 'foo',
      options       => ['Indexes','FollowSymLinks','MultiViews'],
      proxy_pass    => [ { 'path' => '/a', 'url' => 'http://backend-a/' } ],
}
 
apache::vhost { 'bar.example.com':
    port     => '80,
    docroot: => '/var/www/bar.example.com',
}
{% endhighlight %}

So it's a "hash of hashes" data structure. We can represent this in
YAML like so:

{% highlight yaml %}
apache::vhosts:
  foo.example.com:
    port: 80
    docroot: /var/www/foo.example.com
    docroot_owner: foo
    docroot_group: foo
    options:
      - Indexes
      - FollowSymLinks
      - MultiViews
    proxy_pass:
      -
        path: '/a'
        url: 'http://localhost:8080/a'
  bar.example.com:
    port: 80
    docroot: /var/www/bar.example.com
{% endhighlight %}

To retrieve this data from our Puppet code, we need to pull the Hiera data
into a hash variable, then define the resource that this hash
represents using the amazingly useful 'create_resources' function:

{% highlight text %}
$myvhosts = hiera('apache::vhosts', {})
create_resources('apache::vhost', $myvhosts)
{% endhighlight %}

This one requires a bit of thinking... The first line assigns the YAML
data structure to a hash variable, and the second tells Puppet to
use this hash to declare an 'apache::vhost' resource type for each
key in the hash.

I'll try and make it clearer...

### <a name="create_resources: The General Solution"></a>create_resources: The General Solution

Forget about specific modules for a moment. This is the basic principle.

1\. Take a complex data structure, like this:

{% highlight text %}
defined_type { 'name':
  key1 => 'value1',
  key2 => 'value2',
  key3 => ['element1','element2','element3']
  key4 => [ { 'subkey1' => 'subvalue1', 'subkey2' => 'subvalue2' } ],
}
{% endhighlight %}

2\. Represent it in YAML:

{% highlight yaml %}
data_identifier:
  name:
    key1: value1
    key2: value2
    key3:
      - element1
      - element2
      - element3
    key4:
      -
        subkey1: subvalue1
        subkey2: subvalue2
{% endhighlight %}

3\. Pull that Hiera data into a Puppet hash variable (the 'hiera' function
will only pull the data relevant to a particular node, as dictated
by your hierarchy):

{% highlight text %}
$my_hash = hiera('data_identifier', {})
{% endhighlight %}

4\. Then use create_resources to declare a resource for each key of the hash:

{% highlight text %}
create_resources('defined_type', $my_hash)
{% endhighlight %}

Note: For simplicity, 'data_identifier' is often the same string
as 'defined_type', but it's important to realise that it can be
anything you like. This is the key to understanding how it works -
you're *either* using Puppet's auto-lookup feature, in which case the
data identifier has to match the class and parameter names, *or*
you're using create_resources, in which case there's no auto-lookup
and the data identifier can be anything you want.

Hopefully that helps you get started. I can assure you it becomes
clearer the more you use it.

## <a name="Further Reading"></a>Further Reading

* [Hiera Overview][hiera-overview]
* [An Overview of YAML Syntax for Ruby][yaml-for-ruby]
* [Puppet Function Reference][pe-functionref]

## <a name="Next..."></a>Next...

* <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/puppet/autoprovisioning.html">Chapter 4 - Auto-provisioning With Cloud Provisioner</a>
* <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/contents">Table of Contents</a>

[hiera-overview]: http://docs.puppetlabs.com/hiera/1/index.html
[hiera-complete-example]: http://docs.puppetlabs.com/hiera/1/complete_example.html
[pe-functionref]: http://docs.puppetlabs.com/references/3.stable/function.html
[fn-create_resources]: http://docs.puppetlabs.com/references/3.stable/function.html#createresources
[fn-hiera]: http://docs.puppetlabs.com/references/3.stable/function.html#hiera
[end-to-end]: https://ask.puppetlabs.com/question/1655/an-end-to-end-roleprofile-example-using-hiera/
[yaml-for-ruby]: http://www.yaml.org/YAML_for_ruby.html
[hiera-include]: http://docs.puppetlabs.com/references/latest/function.html#hierainclude
