---
layout: post
title:  "Chapter 6 - Puppet Enterprise Roll-out Plan"
date:   2013-12-27 21:18:00
categories: puppet
---

## Coming soon...

Or is it?

How you roll out Puppet is really a very personal thing. I would
expect each and every organisation to take a slightly different
approach as it's highly dependent upon the local infrastructure
landscape.

For example, some organisations may be starting from scratch, or
migrating to new machines in a brand new data centre. Those people
have it easy.

But most organisations will have an existing hodge-podge of inter-dependent
systems, evolved over the years to include anything from mainframes to
Red Hat 7, to Windows NT, to CentOS 6, to BBC Micros. There are going
to be a whole host of issues and unanswered questions before these
organisations even start a roll-out, and it's certainly not my place
to tell anyone how to do it.

All I will say is that you do need to make a plan - even if it's only
high-level, it still has to exist because ultimately this new way of
managing infrastructure will help your organisation change and grow in
a modern keeping-up-with-the-joneses kind of way. Execs may even be
talking about configuration management over their next round of golf.
It's *that* Important. And without a plan (and management buy-in), any
attempt to introduce something like this will very likely fail to get
off the ground.

So. Happy planning, and I wish you all the best of luck. Remember,
there are excellent helpful resources out there, and you're not alone!
